Can I ask you a couple questions?
Did you sleep here last night?
Yes, we did.
>> We did. We got here at about 11:30 p.m.
and got some sleep until maybe 6:00 a.m.
How early did you get here? 6:30. I got
here
a little bit after 4:00. So,
we have been waiting in the line from
last Sunday.
Sir, you've been waiting in line since
last Sunday?
>> Yeah. Yeah, yeah, last Sunday.
From New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro.
This [music] is The Daily.
On Wednesday morning in Washington,
[music] the scene outside of the Supreme
Court captured the enormous stakes
[music] of the case that was about to be
argued before its nine justices. This is
pivotal. This will define the
immigration experience for decades.
Birthright citizenship has just been a
big part of like what it means to be
American for a very long time, like
almost as long as the country. The crux
of this is illegals or those here
temporarily shouldn't receive the
benefit of American citizenship, which
is to be cherished.
A case about President Trump's efforts
to end birthright citizenship that
literally asks who gets to be an
American.
>> [music]
>> So, this case was very important for me
because I'm an immigrant, too.
We all came for the reason because
US is a shining city on the hill. And
now to change the whole thing, I'm like,
did I make a right decision of wanting
to come here?
>> [music]
>> In a case so historic that President
Trump himself showed up in the courtroom
to hear the arguments.
>> [music]
>> Today,
my colleague, Ann Marimow, takes us
inside the room. [music]
It's Thursday, April 2nd.
Ann, you had a pretty coveted seat
inside the Supreme Court on Wednesday
morning, and I suspect your eyes quickly
fixed themselves on the presence of
President Trump. Yes, it was a historic
day. The first sitting president to be
in the Supreme Court courtroom for an
oral argument and to be sitting there as
the justices were debating birthright
citizenship. And what did it look like
for him to enter that august room? So, a
hush came over the courtroom as the
president was escorted to his seat. The
courtroom is always quiet, but this was
even more quiet than usual as he walked
in at that moment wearing a red tie and
a dark suit and took his seat. And it's
really interesting where he was seated.
Instead of being close to the justices
in the special seats reserved for their
families and visiting dignitaries, he
was seated in the front row for the
public. Why? I think it's because he is
one of the parties in the cases and he's
not a lawyer or member of the Supreme
Court bar. So, there he was in the front
row of the public gallery. Just far
enough away, perhaps, for some of the
justices' liking. It feels difficult to
overstate the symbolic potency of the
head of the executive branch being in
this room, in the heart of the judicial
branch. And as you know well, this is a
president known for very keenly
understanding power and how you flex it.
And it felt to me, anyway, like the
president, by showing up for these oral
arguments on this case, was basically
saying,
"You all want to sit in judgment of my
executive order on birthright
citizenship, and therefore I'm going to
sit in judgment of you as you do that."
There's absolutely a lot of symbolism
having him there. He had mused about
showing up previously when the court
took up his tariffs plan. That was also
very important to the president. He
ended up not coming and saying he didn't
want to be a distraction. But you're
right, there's been this effort, as
you've seen when the court has ruled
against him, the president has tried to
intimidate the justices and criticize
them in really harsh personal terms. So,
to have him actually there in person,
face-to-face with the justices, sent a
real signal. And above all, that signal
was this case is really important to the
president and to his second-term agenda,
especially immigration. Just briefly
remind us how this case found its way
into this room. So, you'll remember the
president on his first day back in
office issued this executive order to
really limit the guarantee of birthright
citizenship and say it does not include
the children of illegal immigrants or
the children of many temporary foreign
visitors. Mhm. That was seen as an open
challenge to the long-held understanding
of the 14th Amendment, and there were
lawsuits filed immediately by Democratic
state attorney generals and expected
parents. Right. Basically saying the
14th Amendment guarantees that anyone
born, with very few exceptions, on
American soil is an American citizen.
Yes, and that not just in the 14th
Amendment, but in subsequent court
rulings and actions by past presidents,
this has been the common settled law
understanding. Right. And so, we always
understood that the administration's
legal arguments in defense of this
executive order were going to be
potentially tough sledding before the
entire judiciary. So, take us into these
oral arguments and how they unfold,
[clears throat] and let's start with the
administration's lawyer.
We will hear argument [clears throat]
this morning in case 25-365,
Trump versus Barbara. General Sauer.
Mr. Chief Justice, if it may please the
court. President Trump's Solicitor
General, John Sauer, who represents the
administration at the Supreme Court, is
asking the justices to reinterpret or
restore what he says is the original
meaning of the 14th Amendment. The
citizenship clause was adopted just
after the Civil War to grant citizenship
to the newly freed slaves and their
children. So, a key point to the
administration's argument centered on
the language of the 14th Amendment and
the meaning of a phrase "subject to the
jurisdiction of". The language of the
14th Amendment says that all persons
born or naturalized in the United States
and subject to the jurisdiction thereof
are citizens of the United States. In
1884, this court recognized that subject
to the jurisdiction means owing direct
and immediate allegiance. The clause
thus does not extend citizenship to the
children of temporary visa holders or
illegal aliens.
John Sauer is trying to get the justices
to focus on, again, the meaning of
"subject to the jurisdiction of". In his
view, the babies of illegal immigrants
are not subject to the jurisdiction of
the United States and are therefore not
citizens. Unrestricted birthright
citizenship contradicts the practice of
the overwhelming majority of modern
nations.
It demeans the priceless and profound
gift of American citizenship.
And why, according to Sauer, the
president's Solicitor General, is that
the case? That children born to illegal
immigrants are not subject to the
jurisdiction thereof of the United
States government and therefore not
eligible to be American citizens when
they're born on American soil. So, the
administration's argument really rests
on one of the court's rulings in 1898,
and this is the case of Wong Kim Ark.
There, the court ruled that a man born
in San Francisco, but to Chinese
immigrants, was a citizen. And John
Sauer says, "We've been thinking about
that case all wrong. It's been read too
broadly to apply to a larger group of
people." And really, that he says the
key in that decision is the word
domicile and the fact that Mr. Wong's
parents
um were legally present in the United
States even though they were not
citizens. They had a commitment to
living in the US, and then for that
reason, when their son was born in San
Francisco, he was a citizen. The court
says at the very beginning of its
opinion, "Here are the accepted facts.
These are lawfully domiciled here." When
it states the question presented, it
talks about domicile. When it recites
the legal principle at page 693, it says
domicile three times. And at page 705,
at the end of the opinion, says, "Here's
the single question we've decided. We've
decided that Chinese immigrants with a
permanent domicile and residence here
are fall within the rule of birthright
citizenship." And so, throughout the
argument, John Sauer asked the justices
to focus on that word and saying that
that's key to someone being able to
become a birthright citizen. And just
define that word domicile because,
having watched these oral arguments
myself, not in the room, but at home, it
comes up a lot. It did come up a lot,
and the Solicitor General told the
justices domicile to him and
the law means somebody's residence, but
also their intention to stay and make a
home, and having the ability legally to
be able to be domiciled somewhere.
And in his telling,
undocumented immigrants, by definition,
cannot be legally domiciled in the
United States because they are here
illegally. Because they've come into the
country illegally, but also he brings in
another term, and that is allegiance,
because they sort of have a political
allegiance to a foreign nation. It did
not grant citizenship to the children of
temporary visitors or illegal aliens who
have no such allegiance. This conclusion
reflects the original public meeting of
the clause.
So, basically, Sauer is arguing that if
you look really closely,
especially at that Ark case issued by
the Supreme Court many, many, many
decades ago, people have been
misunderstanding
this birthright citizenship precedent
for a very long time and they've allowed
it to be applied too broadly to people
who should not be birthright citizens,
illegal immigrants especially. That's
right. Okay, so how do the justices
respond to this argument? So, John Sauer
got a lot of pushback pretty quickly,
including from some of the key
conservative justices who are often in
the majority, most notably from Chief
Justice Roberts. You obviously put a lot
of weight on subject to the jurisdiction
thereof. But the examples you give to
support that strike me as very quirky,
you know,
>> He referred to the government's theory
as quirky. Never a great sign.
>> [laughter]
>> Exactly. So, the Chief Justice pointed
out that the 14th Amendment includes
very specific exceptions to groups of
people who are not subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States and
therefore not citizens. You know,
children of an ambassadors, children of
enemies during a hostile invasion,
children on warships. These are children
of foreign diplomats, children of
invading armies, and the children of
Native American tribes until Congress
changed the law. And then you expand it
to a whole class of
illegal aliens who are here in the
country.
I'm not quite sure how you can get to
that big group from such tiny and sort
of idiosyncratic examples. And he's
asking John Sauer, you're asking us to
create this huge new exception and to
expand that understanding. Right, Robert
seems to be saying, you want us to get
from the concept that invading pillagers
of the US, their kids should not be
American citizens, to suddenly saying
that all the children of undocumented
immigrants shouldn't be given birthright
citizenship and he just doesn't quite
see the line between the two.
Yes, and Sauer's response is to go back
to the debates around the drafting of
the 14th Amendment and even to a statute
that existed before the amendment and to
pull out various statements from
senators at the time. And one of the
strongest statements of this is Senator
Trumbull's statement that I quoted at
the beginning where he says he's asked,
"What does that mean, subject to the
jurisdiction thereof?" And he says, "It
means not owing allegiance to anybody
else. That is what it means." And this
And to try to reinforce this idea that
in order to be a birthright citizen,
your parents had to have complete
allegiance to what he called the
political jurisdiction of the United
States. And it felt like the Solicitor
General knew his audience, that this
conservative majority on this court
likes originalism, likes to go back to
original sources, and that he was
appealing to that background. Sure,
that's going to be key to this decision.
What was the original meaning? What were
the drafters thinking of the time? And
there was a lot of discussion about how
do you apply that history and the text
to this modern-day issue of illegal
immigration that the drafters were not
necessarily thinking about in these
terms at that time. And what we're
dealing with here is something that was
basically unknown at the time when the
14th Amendment was adopted, which is
illegal immigration. So, how do we deal
with that situation when we have a
general rule? Right, Justice Alito pipes
up at this point and he's curious how
the government's argument confronts
that. Right, and he asks about the idea
of applying a broad principle to a new
problem and the Solicitor General says,
"That's right, this broad principle does
apply here and that's what we often do
when we're interpreting the
Constitution." And he has all of these
historical examples that he cites to
sort of back up this claim in the way
that he thinks the principle has been
applied over time. Now, the problem of
temporary visitors did exist and it's
very interesting that as you look at
pages 26 and 28 of our brief,
commentators going from, you know, 1881
until 1922 are uniformly saying that
children of temporary visitors are not
included. And then Justice Kagan
intervenes and says, "Wait a minute."
Where does this principle come from?
Allegiance, domicile, uh
allegiance, I think you point to a
Lincoln funeral speech as your primary
example of where this principle comes
from. It's certainly
>> These are really obscure, esoteric
references you're making to history and
kind of pulling them out of thin air.
But as far as I can tell, you know, at
the time of the 14th You're using some
pretty obscure sources to get to this
uh concept. And she really cast out on
those as strong evidence. Right, she
seems to be saying, "I'm listening to
all your historical references and they
feel like you're really stretching and
reaching because you don't have text
within the 14th Amendment on your side.
In fact, the text of the 14th Amendment,
in her telling, undermines your case."
So, what's interesting is that the
skepticism about the administration's
use of history extends from the liberal
justices to some of the key conservative
votes like Justice Barrett and Justice
Gorsuch.
>> Well, and just to circle back to Justice
Kagan's point, um it's striking that in
none of the debates do we have parents
discussed. We We have the the child's
citizenship and and the focus of clause
is on the child, not on the parents. And
you don't see domicile mentioned in in
the debates. That's
the absence is striking. And Gorsuch
asked questions about this word domicile
and says, "If that's so critical to your
argument, where is that in the debates
surrounding the drafting of the 14th
Amendment? Where is that in the history?
What was the understanding of that word
at the time?" And what is Sauer's
response? Well, he says that there are
19th-century sources that talk about
domicile, but really returns to Wong Kim
Ark and the language in that opinion. I
would first cite Wong Kim Ark on that
point cuz Wong Kim Ark says you're
>> Well, I'm not sure how much you want to
rely on Wong Kim Ark.
>> But that the state There is a statement
in there that says, "So long as they are
permitted to be here." And Gorsuch goes
so far as to suggest the Solicitor
General not rely on the decision in Wong
Kim Ark that was taken as a broad
affirmation of birthright citizenship.
This exchange really does seem to
capture the tricky spot that the Trump
administration is in here because one of
the biggest arguments it's presenting to
these justices
is this idea that a decades-old Supreme
Court ruling that, as you said, broadly
affirms birthright citizenship as a
universal principle, that somehow
underpins the administration's case that
birthright citizenship shouldn't apply
to illegal immigrants. And
Gorsuch, a Trump appointee to the
Supreme Court, is saying,
"Be careful here because you're kind of
turning yourself into a legal pretzel."
Right, by the time John Sauer was
finished with his argument, you had
Chief Justice Roberts asking him about
his quirky, idiosyncratic theory. You
had Justice Amy Coney Barrett asking how
is this going to work on a practical
level with the parents of newborn babies
and asking them about their immigration
status. And you had Justice Gorsuch
saying this precedent you're relying on
is probably not your best case.
So, it was not looking good for the
administration.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> So, Ann, walk us through the argument
put forth by the other side of this
case, the lawyer challenging President
Trump's executive order on birthright
citizenship. Ms. Wong. Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the court.
>> So, this is Cecilia Wong, who is legal
director of the American Civil Liberties
Union and she's representing the group
of expectant parents who've sued the
Trump administration on behalf of their
future babies. Ask any American what our
citizenship rule is and they'll tell
you, everyone born here is a citizen
alike.
That rule was enshrined in the 14th
Amendment to put it out of the reach of
any government official to destroy. And
Wong makes the case that it's a simple
reading of the 14th Amendment.
>> When the government tried to strip Mr.
Wong Kim Ark's citizenship on largely
the same grounds they raise today, this
court said no. That it's been
interpreted broadly for generations and
understood in court rulings throughout
the years and executive actions by past
presidents. And she says very strongly
that the interpretation of the 14th
Amendment should not be changed now. My
friend has now clearly said that the
government is not asking you to overrule
Wong Kim Ark. That is a fatal
concession. Because Wong Kim Ark's
controlling rule of decision precludes
their parental domicile requirement. And
Wong says that the government's case is
particularly weak because it's asking
the court not to overrule Wong Kim Ark,
which again she says stands for this
broad principle of birthright
citizenship. And the majority tells us
six times in the opinion that domicile
is irrelevant under common law. She says
the government's emphasis on the word
domicile was not the point of that
opinion. So, if they continue to say
that it should not be overruled, then
the ACLU should win. Right, she
basically seems to be saying where the
Trump administration finds some legal
solace in this case, which is that old
Ark case,
means that actually they have no case at
all because that domicile argument, in
her telling, is just kind of bunk.
Right, but then she faces some major
pushback from the justices. We've heard
a lot of talk about Wong
Kim Ark and you dismiss the use of word
domicile in it. It appears in the
opinion 20 different times. So first she
hears from Chief Justice Roberts who
makes the point that the administration
has made over time to point out that the
opinion in Wong Kim Ark does include the
word domicile 20 times. Isn't it at
least something to be concerned about to
say that discussed 20 different times
and has that significant role in the
opinion that you can just dismiss it as
irrelevant?
Well, Chief
>> And she asks sort of how this can be
dismissed as irrelevant if the court
from that era chose to include that in
the opinion. That just
>> on on that, what do we do with the fact
that after Wong Kim Ark
at least some authorities took the view
that the non-domiciliary
question wasn't decided, remained open,
and even continued to press
the view that domicile is required. You
hear similar questions from Justice
Gorsuch about the history and then
perhaps more surprising Justice Elena
Kagan, a liberal, also starts asking
questions about the appearance of the
word domicile throughout the opinion.
Well, Miss Wong, I mean everything you
say strikes me as yeah, that's that's
the way I read it too, but then what are
those 20 domicile words doing there?
Well, I think again that was those were
the stipulated facts in the case and
it's clear we have textual evidence in
the majority opinion. And in response,
similar to the Solicitor General, she
started pulling on different aspects of
history. We have an 1896
State Department regulation. All to make
this case about the long-standing broad
principle of birthright citizenship.
>> Again, after setting out the English
common law rule and the exception
>> back to English common law and other
areas of history citing even the example
of Japanese nationals who were interned
during World War II. When the United
States was detaining
Japanese nationals
>> whose children, babies who were born,
were US citizens. Everyone agreed that
those babies were US citizens and
Professor Mueller goes on to explain
that, you know, there are many cases of
those US citizens going on to a lifetime
of government service to the United
States. Everyone agrees those babies
>> Right. And and seemingly to make the
point that even in what seemed like
rather extreme
moments where we might question the
allegiance of a foreign national
and whether they were domiciled, our
system determined that their children
were American citizens. Yes, exactly.
Even in wartime, she's saying this
principle was affirmed over and over
again throughout history. And
[clears throat] many of the justices
seemed satisfied with her answers to
questions about the word domicile, but
one of the most skeptical justices
seemed to be Justice Samuel Alito.
So let me give you these examples. Um
Who posed a hypothetical about a boy
born to an Iranian father.
>> That boy is automatically an Iranian
national at birth and he has a duty to
provide military service to the Iranian
government. Is he not subject to any
foreign power? And he asked wouldn't the
child be subject to military service and
doesn't that child still have allegiance
to that country? It's a surprise that he
brought up this example since we are at
war with Iran. Right. But again, Justice
Alito, that would have meant that the
children of Irish, Italian, and
other immigrants which Wong Kim Ark
refers to in the debate the framers
referred to
would not have been citizens either.
And in response, Wong tried to broaden
the scope to say, you know, if that's
the case, what about children of Irish
immigrants? What about children of
Italian immigrants? Likely referring to
Justice Alito's own immigration history.
Right, because Alito is of Italian
descent. And what she seems to be saying
is if you take the hypothetical argument
that Alito is making about an Iranian
father and son and what he have to serve
in the army, perhaps cuz he has dual
citizenship, that that was true of every
person from every country who came to
the US and had a kid, they owed some
theoretical allegiance back to their
home country.
Right. And she's saying that this issue
of birthright citizenship has never been
about the parents, it's always about the
children born here and their citizenship
opportunities. Thank you, Counsel
General. The case is submitted.
And as these arguments wrapped up on
Wednesday afternoon, and just to say
they were long and they were very
substantive
was it right to think of this as a case
that is quite likely to cut against the
president and his executive order
seeking to end birthright citizenship?
Was that the way the wind was blowing?
Yeah, I heard skepticism from at least a
majority of justices including some key
conservative justices, but I was also
struck by how seriously they took the
arguments from the Trump administration.
Those were once seen as sort of fringe
obscure theories. It was clear that they
were trying to process those and make
sense of those. At the end of the day, I
do think that the citizenship order will
be struck down.
And I want you to return to President
Trump who is, best I can tell, is in
that courtroom during a lot of the
argument we're talking about. What do
you glean
from his body language, from anything,
about what he made of these arguments?
Well, he ended up leaving about halfway
through. He stayed to hear from his
Solicitor General arguing in favor of
the administration's position. He
listened to the introduction from the
ACLU lawyer and then he popped up and
just slowly walked out of the courtroom
and quickly went back to the White
House. And there he got onto social
media and started criticizing the whole
idea of guaranteed birthright
citizenship saying that the United
States is the only country in the world
stupid enough, as he said, to allow
birthright citizenship which we know is
not true, but just showing how much this
is on his mind and how important it is
to him. Right. And something about that
phrase stupid enough makes me think that
Trump might have left the Supreme Court
not certain of victory. In fact, maybe
nervous of defeat and perhaps if he had
hoped that being there might change the
dynamics of this difficult case, perhaps
recognizing that maybe it didn't.
I think that he's been counseled all
along that this was a a difficult case
asking the court to reinterpret a a
long-held understanding of the 14th
Amendment, but certainly the atmosphere,
the dynamics, the pushback to the
administration could not have felt great
leaving the courtroom.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Well, Ann,
thank you very much. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
As we speak this evening, it's been just
1 month since the United States military
began
Operation
Epic Fury [music]
targeting the world's number one state
sponsor of terror
Iran. [music]
In a televised speech to the nation on
Wednesday night, President Trump
declared that the United [music] States
and his really war against Iran has been
a major military success. In these past
4 weeks, [music] our armed forces have
delivered swift, decisive, overwhelming
victories [music] on the battlefield.
But Trump offered no clear timeline for
when or how the war might end,
downplayed [music] its economic costs,
and claimed, without evidence, that the
Strait of Hormuz would spontaneously
open back up at the conclusion of the
[music] conflict. When this conflict is
over, the strait will open up naturally.
It'll just open up naturally. They're
going to want
>> [music]
>> And
8 7 RS-25 engines
4 3 2 1 Booster ignition
and liftoff.
Artemis II, [music] a 10-day mission
around the moon, began on Wednesday
evening [music] when a spacecraft
carrying four astronauts blasted off
from the Kennedy [music] Space Center in
Florida.
The crew of Artemis II now bound for the
moon. Humanity's [music] next great
voyage begins.
The mission is one of several that are
expected to culminate in the next few
years with the return [music]
of humans to the moon for the first time
in decades.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Eric
Krupke, Shannon Lin, Lexi Dio,
>> [music]
>> and Jack D'Isidoro with help from Claire
Tensegetter.
It was edited [music] by Rob Zipko and
MJ Davis Lin with help from Lindsey
Harrison.
Contains music [music] by Marion Lozano,
Chelsea Daniel, and Pat McCusker.
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.
>> [music]